so today we're going to talk about
loneliness
with um one of our viewers so someone
from our community
uh is going to come on and we're going
to just talk a little bit about
loneliness
if you guys are suffering from
loneliness or being stuck for a video
game
addiction or motivation or other issues
that are kind of keeping you
from moving forward in life unable to
find your purpose things like that
go ahead and check out our coaching
program
and you know i think group coaching is a
great way to sort of address
loneliness and sort of meet other people
one thing to know about
group coaching is it's not really about
making friends it's about sort of
forming really authentic bonds with
people
that you guys can like work on your
issues with um work through your
challenges kind of together
but if you guys are looking to party up
and and work on being stuck in life
definitely check out the coaching
program
hey man thanks for coming on
no worries man so and what am i calling
you
uh you can call me nicholas or nick
whatever you prefer
okay so nicholas
um and so tell
so we're talking about loneliness today
um yeah well mostly uh emotional
loneliness not like a physical point
of view okay so let's start there what's
the difference between physical
loneliness and emotional loneliness
um well to me it's um
well you can have friends physically and
hang out with them but you can still not
feel the
connection always so then you
emotionally feel lonely because you
don't have anyone to maybe
talk to and really lit up with if that
makes sense to you
so yeah okay you get emotionally
isolated at that point
is what i feel like okay so can you tell
us what that feels like
um to me it feels a lot like
uh well you feel lonely of course you
feel like
you can't rely on anyone and you don't
really feel understood
on a lot of points as a person so you
feel
lonely and like you can't be understood
yes that's part of it um it's a lot to
do with the fact that
you don't yeah it's mainly just like
being understood by people on a on an
emotional level like on a deeper level
i guess you could say so so you it's it
sounds like you actually have kind of
people around you you have friends but
you feel misunderstood
definitely i don't i don't feel like um
like really really close with an
exception of like a few people
but i have a lot of friends that i don't
have like an actual connection with
if that makes sense okay so it's like i
don't feel like i can
rely on a lot of them on a deeper level
okay but it sounds like you do have a
few people that you sort of
rely on or can rely on on a deeper level
yeah more or less i don't really i don't
really talk to them
on a deeper level level a lot um
a lot of it is me myself in my own room
feeling myself being lonely if that
makes sense
um and then um to kind of explain it
better it has like two parts of it
it has the part where i feel like i
can't connect with a lot of people but i
also have like
i don't wanna call it anxiety but i
wanna i'm like scared right
so i'm scared of being alone later in
life or being like
forever alone if that makes sense
so it's like those sure combinations so
so
you're scared of being alone and what's
the second piece
um no the first piece is that i'm
currently feeling like
emotionally alone um which i tried to
explain earlier
yeah and then the second piece is kind
of me being scared for the future
that i won't have people uh to be with
both like plasonically and romantically
okay um have you been in a romantic
relationship before
yep that's been around four years ago
okay and do you mind if i ask how old
you are
yeah i'm 20. you're 20. okay yeah
and how long have you been feeling
emotionally lonely
for around three years maybe
okay and do you remember what you felt
like in your late teens like what
what changed um
well now it's something i have accepted
it's like a part of me now so it's not
something
i'm bothering to bother too much by um
but you've accepted that you're gonna be
lonely
no i'm accepted it's the feeling i have
uh okay so like you know yeah yeah
so basically during high school i
uh i was bought bothered a lot by the
fact that i felt lonely and that
my peers seemed way more popular than me
in all aspects
um which gave me insecurities and then
i went to a therapist like school
therapist
and she kind of changed my outlook and
stuff by saying it's all about the
attitude when you go to like parties etc
right
um so she tried to instill in me that
if you come in with a good attitude
compared to the bad one
you'll have more success in finding
friends and so on
um which you know did work in finding
friends but it doesn't really work for
me
on an emotional level if that makes
sense sure so
feeling it yeah interesting
can i think for a second nicholas sure
okay give me just another second okay
yeah no worries it's a good thing let me
ask you something did your feeling of
emotional loneliness get worse
the better you got at changing your
attitude
the um what i call anxiety or whatever
it is
got worse so whenever i had um
an episode of feeling extra lonely and
started spiraling in my thoughts
that would get worse a lot worse
basically what would get a lot worse
um the amount of times i would
feel like the feelings and the thoughts
would come up uh came more often than it
would
like be there for longer like the
episode and so that
that happened more the more you learn to
change your attitude in social
situations
yeah definitely okay so let's let's just
notice that for a second because that
sounds
i mean it makes perfect sense to me but
it sounds strange
right so like here you're seeing a
therapist and your therapist is telling
you hey if you're like
insecure about going to parties what you
can do is change your attitude
and then you can like learn to be like
more friendly and more positive
and as you become more friendly and
positive you'll be able to make more
friends
and you'll be able to go to parties is
that a fair
no i would say the way she wanted me to
think about it
is that if you change so um she had to
think about self
fulfilling prophecies right so if i came
in there thinking
oh um nobody would like me or nobody
cares about me or whatever
she would say that would you know rub
off to people
compared to if i came and being like hey
let's meet new people let's make friends
so she was saying she was basically
saying if i went to the party with a
more positive
attitude um i wouldn't feel
uh as judged or whatever you could call
it
okay and and that worked
yes well while it did uh i got more
friends
i was more confident although i am more
confident confident about going to
parties
but i also feel more disconnected
okay right so let's so this is going to
sound kind of strange
let me ask you nicholas what do you
think is how do you understand that do
you have any ideas as to what's going on
um kind of i mean to me
i think it's because most of the
relationships are kind of superficial
um and why are they superficial
what makes them
i'll say it's due to the fact that we're
only connected by
other friends and we don't actually like
hang out
and meet and interact you know what i
mean so we only
hang out superficially whenever there's
a reason to do it
we don't really support each other like
with feelings and whatnot because we
don't talk about it
that much at least um
so i feel like that's the main thing
because we don't really like support
each other
in that fact what keeps you from talking
about your feelings
um i have a strong feeling of
independence
and not really relying on each other or
other people
i would say anyways okay so i'm going to
talk about a theme for today
right it's how the solutions are the
problems
that's our theme for today sure
um so i'm going to try to explain this
concept for a second and then we're
going to see if how much of it applies
and how much of it doesn't
okay okay
so
if we think about people who have
problems in their relationships
they tend to hold on to old solutions
that
used to work so one of my uh
teachers once told me that the process
of growing up
is about getting rid of what works which
is kind of a weird way to think about it
but like let's say i'm a two-year-old
kid and i don't get what i want and then
i start crying and then maybe i'll get
what i want
right so like like two-year-olds have
certain ways to make their needs known
and get what they
are looking for and get their needs met
as we grow older ideally a two-year-old
will like
abandon some of those things because
even though it used to work it's sort of
not working anymore
but even like a 13 year old who throws a
temper tantrum
depending on the circumstances that they
grow up in will actually get that
their needs met through a temper tantrum
and they're also
20 year olds 30 year olds 40 year olds
for whom like
throwing temper tantrums is a way to get
their needs met
and if they end up like let's say you're
25 years old and you're used to throwing
temper tantrums because your parents
sort of tolerated that kind of thing
and then you start engaging in a
romantic relationship and you start
throwing temper tantrums
and depending on who you're dating
they'll either tolerate that
or they'll break up with you and when a
lot of people break up with you
that becomes sort of a relationship
problem right like it's there's some
problem that you have with relationships
and what i find time and again is that
first of all i start with the assumption
that like people aren't stupid
i also start with the assumption that
people aren't like broken in some way
i think for the most part most people
out there like have
brains and bodies and minds that are
functioning the best way that they know
now right if you think about like you
know your body like
most people's hands work pretty well
most people's eyes work pretty well this
is a really crazy thing most people's
minds work pretty well they do exactly
what they're designed to do
but they do know do the best that they
know how
so what i'm noticing any questions about
that
no that makes sense okay so it's kind of
weird right because you went to this
therapist
and your therapist like taught you this
like positive mental attitude strategy
and what we're hearing is actually a lot
of success we're hearing that you were
able to go to parties
that you were able to make friends that
you changed your attitude and you feel
confident and comfortable
interacting with other people whereas in
high school you didn't really feel that
way so that's a success
right right yeah and at the same time
i asked you kind of a weird question
because if this is a success
i asked you the question have you found
that
the better you got at this the more
emotionally isolated you feel
and your answer was what um yeah
correct so like let's try to think about
how does that happen
like what's going on there so
my sense is that this worked for you but
what you learned how to do
was like put on a certain kind of
clothing
like you put on this mental clothing of
like i'm gonna have a positive mental
attitude
and then you started to be someone that
you're not exactly
like you started to take parts of
yourself like you had these insecurities
right and then what you did is you like
buried those insecurities underneath
this like positive mental attitude
and as a result the most connected that
someone can get to you
is halfway because the most they ever
see
is like the positive part and then what
you're here what i'm hearing from you is
that like you you
you don't have a deeper emotional
connection with people
and that's sort of because like i think
you approach it from sort of a
hey let's like hang out and like let's
meet people and let's have a good time
and so you project that side of yourself
which is a good side and people kind of
like that and they're like hey like
nicholas is a pretty cool guy
but it never gets to something serious
because all the serious stuff has been
kind of pushed away what do you think
i can definitely agree with that um
mainly to do with all of my good friends
that i do rely on every now and then are
from you know before high school mainly
so you know back from when i was 14 and
10 and under
stuff like that so so yeah so let's
think about
who did they get to know um
well yeah definitely the more uh
connected or like
true part of myself i guess you could
call it i just know actual true part of
oneself but you know
why not what does that mean well um
i just have to think that you always
project one side of you to everyone
you don't always reject like the whole
side of yourself
no matter who you're with i feel like
just um because you know like when when
as you talked about the mastering when
you go to
like a sports club or whatever you put
on one side of yourself when you go to a
class you put on another site so on and
so forth
um so i feel like with
my older friends they definitely got to
know me better
on a more all-around standpoint but
i don't think there's anyone that like
really
you know know that for me not even
myself
so do you want them to know the for you
um no why not i don't think so
because i think there's some things i
want to keep private for myself
um just for the fact that there's some
things i feel like that
that shouldn't be shared to other people
um it doesn't have to be anything
sensitive just um
it could be hobbies it could be
um just your alone time in general
honestly it could be your own those
secrets or
promises to yourself but i think it
depends from person to person mean so i
totally get that things are
personal right i'm still a little bit
curious about
it seems like you feel like they
shouldn't be shared
no i'm not saying that necessarily it's
just my
um i'm just saying me personally would
rather
not share everything something someone
just wants to keep
yeah and are there things that you want
to share but you haven't been able to
definitely yeah um like now like the
emotional and
and every time i felt depressed like in
previous times in high school
uh i couldn't for example always talk to
my parents because i wasn't comfortable
with it
um stuff like that you know so you
weren't comfortable with it what does
that mean
um the reason why i wasn't comfortable
with it
is due to my mother being very uh
like she blames herself a lot for a lot
of things so i felt like if i told her
she would
be upset about it um so that's the
reason
and also just the fact that i wasn't
comfortable sharing things about myself
in general at that point in time
i was very like isolated so
so nicholas those two combinations what
are you afraid is going to happen if
people see who you are
um i'm afraid that people will leave
like for good physically and emotionally
does that happen to you before yes
a long time ago though i was
14 i believe where i had like a lot of
friends that were just
from my knowledge randomly leave without
any actual reason
and what's can you tell us about that
um so i had a combination of online
friends and real-life friends
that sometimes would just like cut me
off and
just stop talking from that point um
which seemed to me at that point that we
were in good terms
so it didn't really make sense to me um
so that's where like
basically a lot of it stems from i think
i think so too
yeah so i feel like a lot of it at least
afterwards at that point
which i do know is that i i shrugged
myself in
and didn't trust a lot of people um and
then they kind of
kind of came over and started trusting
people again and talking to people but i
never really
you know fully opened myself up anymore
afterwards i think you started talking
to people again i don't think you
started trusting people
right what can you tell us
uh can you tell us a story about when
you were 14 like give us an example
like help me understand what that what
happened
um it's it's kind of hard to
i mean not to talk about but to explain
um
basically so i had a few friends that i
talked to almost every day
um and i don't know there's not much to
talk about
except for the fact that i was just
caught off completely one day
from all of them or one of them no it's
just a few of them like a few of my
friends
over a period of time i think it's
around like half a year
just like disappeared um and they didn't
really know each other so i'm not sure
how
like it happened but just um some
important people left me
like after each other basically and
how did they how did they cut you off
like like how did that happen
like that you know they uh blocked me on
social media they didn't reply to
messages they stopped
hanging out with me in that sense
interesting so these are real life
friends let's like just about just
both both a real life person and a few
online yeah
can we just pick one and kind of go
through the sequence of events
um sure i'm trying to feel like uh
i'm trying to find if there's any theme
um
so what happens is that huh nicholas i i
don't want a theme and i don't want a
conclusion
i want as raw of a data as you can
provide
so as unfiltered as you can give me like
tell me you know think about like just
like pick one person and then you kind
of said they blocked you on social media
and stuff like that so
were these people that you knew at
school
um no mostly online friends some of them
are my later on though
but mostly only friends so that i came
to know online friends and like how did
you know them online did you guys play
games together like what was the deal
some of them i played games with uh and
others i just met on this
uh social media app called meow chat
which is not you know available anymore
okay um server shutdown or something i'm
not sure about anyways
it's like basically an app like discord
but you can meet random random people
okay um some of them i happened later
one of them became my girlfriend
afterwards um not my current girlfriend
but like
at the time um
and yeah so we i talked to them there
and then a lot of them
they didn't know each other a lot of
them started cutting me off after like
half a year i think it was
a half a year year's time um
and one of them also
like basically one of them states that
they couldn't use the phone
and then i found out they had the phone
later on to you know chat on
and then you know i was blocked later
how did you find that out
they had an alternate account
and how did you feel when you found out
they were lying to you
i felt betrayed to put it simple pretty
much yeah
what do you mean by betrayed um like
they
they betrayed my trust basically and
uh the friendship we had at the time how
did they betray it
um well like you said lying to me uh
by trying to get out of the relationship
we had like
the friendship um without an actual
reason without telling me why or what's
going on or anything like no
communication whatsoever
um so i think that is what kind of
struck me so i'm i'm envisioning that
you sort of
started to be afraid that there's
something wrong with you
right yeah i guess you could say that
that is um
sorry go ahead um no um one of the
themes i have when i
when i get these episodes of feeling uh
lonely and
afraid is that i feel like something's
wrong with me but i quite can't
uh figure out what it is does that make
sense where does your mind
go yeah go ahead um it goes in a spiral
but it usually goes
towards the direction where i feel like
i don't deserve a lot of friends
and relationships is where it tends to
go towards
can i think for a second sure
do you have a sense of of why it is that
let's assume for a moment that that's
true that you don't deserve a lot of
friends
what do you think it is that makes you
not deserve a lot of friends
um that's what i never can't figure out
um so that's why i call it like an
anxiety even though it's not
you know diagnosed because none of the
thoughts that get makes sense
whatsoever like there's no logic in them
okay so i i i just spiraled towards it
and i can't figure out why that would be
the case
i'm just looking at trends in the fact
that you know
my friends seem to be more popular and i
lost friends and stuff like that if that
makes sense
so i want to ask you something nicholas
or i'm going to make an observation
actually sure so i want you to notice
that a lot of times
when we have a feeling our mind tries to
come up with
reasons which is what it's supposed to
do
so let's say that i'm walking barefoot
and i feel something poke my foot
so what do i do i i notice that
sensation i have a feeling of stepping
on something
sharp and then i lift up my foot and i
look at my foot
and i look at the ground does that make
sense
i look for a reason why
i feel a certain way
does that make sense that makes a lot of
sense yeah so like let's say i'm in a
relationship
and i have a feeling that my partner is
cheating on me
then what i do is i go look for reasons
i start checking their phone
i start texting them i start asking
around
i look for a reason to explain a feeling
and what i'm hearing from you is that
you have a fee
and you have a feeling but you haven't
been able to find a reason
definitely yeah and you're still looking
for ways
yes what do you think about that
um that is
i don't know i i can't collect my
thoughts on exactly that
i feel anything if anything i feel
scared um yep
so i think the more you look for a
reason
and the more you're unable to find one
what does that do to your fear
uh accelerates it i would say absolutely
right
because you're like oh my god there's
something wrong and i can't find it
and it's big and it's bad and i'm
looking and i'm looking and i'm looking
and i can't find it and if i can't find
it i can't fix it
and if i can't fix it i'm going to be
alone
because whatever it is is going to pop
up again and it's going to drive people
away
yes that would be the case okay
do you think that kind of encapsulates
how you feel
uh yeah actually i would say it is um
yeah because that would count both
platonically and momentarily
yeah okay
so i want to talk to you for a second
about something called psychosis
okay and i realize this is kind of weird
i'm not trying to judge you
yeah have you heard this term psychosis
i have but i'm not quite sure of the
definition of it okay
so like do you know what the word
paranoia means
yeah okay so i i don't think you're
psychotic i don't think you're paranoid
or anything like that
the the reason i'm bringing it up is
because sometimes if we want to try to
understand how something works
we have to look at
a malfunction of that object
so for example if i'm trying to figure
out what a tire does
on a car if i
slash the tire and let the air out then
i quickly figure out oh
this is the function of the tire does
that make sense
if we break like some piece like if i
unplug my mouse like if i don't know
what controls my computer and then i
unplug my mouse i can quickly figure out
okay the keyboard controls this and the
mouse controls this does that make sense
so we can discover the function
of something by looking at a case of
malfunction
with me yeah so i want to use psychosis
to illustrate
a general principle of the mind that
applies to everyone
but when we look at psychosis we'll kind
of see how that function of the mind
works because we'll look at like
a version that's kind of busted so
sometimes people
have um paranoia and it's sort of like
an
it's like a illness or like it's it's a
malfunction of paranoia
so what happens is that you know
sometimes people with psychosis they'll
wake up one day and they feel like
they're being watched
they have a feeling i'm being watched in
the same way that you have a feeling
that something is wrong with you
you just wake up one day and you're like
i've got i'm a feeling i have a feeling
that something's being watched
so then what happens is their logical
mind starts to try to figure things out
like okay where like who's watching me
and they look around and they're like oh
well i have like these two webcams here
and so like that must be what's watching
me so what they do is they unplug their
webcams
and they like feel better for a day and
then they wake up the next day and
they're like okay i feel like i'm being
watched
like i took care of the webcams like
what else is going on oh must be someone
maybe someone's looking at me through
the windows so then what they do is they
like they
close up all the windows and then
they're like feel better for a day and
the next day they wake up and they're
like i feel like i'm being watched
and they're like not really sure what's
going on so then they walk down the
street
and sure enough there's someone looking
at them they're walking down the street
and there's someone walking the other
way and like that person's kind of
watching
and then they go and they're they drive
around and they see like their
cars like they make a right turn and
someone else makes a right turn
and they're like oh my god maybe i'm
being followed
and this goes on for a while and then
like they they try to figure out okay
where is this feeling coming from who's
watching me
and then eventually like they start to
construct like really bizarre theories
so they start to think that like
it must be the government or the mafia
because they think
who has the resources to be constantly
watching me
and the best answer that they can come
up with is like a powerful organization
but what i want to point out is like
you know which comes first the thought
or the feeling
the feeling and the thought is always
looking for an answer does that make
sense
yeah and so the the really interesting
thing is that's the way our mind is
wired though because like when we step
on something we have a feeling and then
our mind has evolved to be like hey
let's try to figure out where this
feeling comes from
like that's what our mind does it's like
it tries to explain
our feelings because our feelings tend
to be like
you know intuitive like warning signs or
like i mean there's a lot of
important stuff in feelings if i walk
into a room
and i make eye contact with someone and
then i have butterflies in my stomach
and i start to feel sweaty
and i start giggling like an idiot like
those feelings are telling me something
right so feelings are a really important
source of information
and then my mind tries to like piece
together what's going on with the
feeling
any questions so far no that makes sense
what makes sense about it um
the fact that we are you know we've
evolved to perceive stuff
and then make sense of it right so we're
using our senses yeah that makes a lot
of sense to me yeah yeah
but the thing is that feelings come
first
definitely right and and so like you
know you can walk into
um you know you can walk into your house
late at night and then like you get this
feeling that maybe you're in danger and
all the lights are off
and like that feeling comes from
somewhere and then you try to reassure
it you turn on the lights you look
around whatever
so in your case i think what could be
going on
is that you have a feeling that
something in you is busted
and that's not an inaccurate feeling
because
how else do you explain these people
ghosting you like there must be
something wrong right
but i i think what started to happen is
that feeling
has started to grow so much and develop
a life of its own
that your mind is doing all these
compensatory mechanisms it's like
starting to think about this and think
about this and think about this
and you can never find the answer for
what's wrong with you because i don't
think there's anything wrong with you
i think the reason that you feel like
something is wrong with you is because
people did treated you in a way that
made you feel
not valued yeah
but the thing is that feeling doesn't
come from the outside it comes from
their actions towards you
does that make sense sure yeah so like
let me give you just another example
so let's say i have abuse of parents if
my parents treat me like [ __ ] i'm gonna
go through life
feeling like i'm worth nothing
it doesn't actually mean i'm worth
nothing it just means that
the way that my parents treated me made
me feel like i'm worth nothing
and then as i go through life with that
feeling i'm gonna come up with all kinds
of compensatory mechanisms or solutions
to deal with it like i need to ask
people all the time like i have to ask
them like if i'm dating someone i have
to ask them every single day
do you love me true
because i need to hear it from them
because i don't believe it about myself
so i need reassurance do you love it
do you really love me do you really
really really
are you gonna leave me promise you me
promise me you'll never leave promise me
because i don't have faith or confidence
that this person wouldn't want to leave
me
and so your mind comes up with all these
things to try to account for it but at
the end of the day like
where does that person's lack of
confidence come from
well that would come from themselves
absolutely
right yeah do you think this applies to
your situation
yeah i would say yeah
i would say in a different way but it
applies more to the fact that i
um keep telling myself that i'm gonna be
lonely whenever you know
these thoughts come up and i just um i
can't stop that feeling of thought
from coming and then in that sense as
you said earlier i take the logic to the
fact that that might be something wrong
with me even though it's not an actual
fact
um so i think in that way it would apply
but you know yeah so
now we get to an interesting great point
so let me ask you
when you feel like you're gonna be
lonely what do you
try to do with that feeling
um whenever that happens i don't really
do
much about it i tend to isolate myself
and just be in my fields for the next
two hours three hours
and then after that i just kind of get
numb if that makes sense
okay that doesn't make sense so i think
you you kind of get like
mentally exhausted from the feeling yeah
i would say that yeah yep
right so like sounds like an overload
yep overload and then it's like
you know it's like a you know what a
blue screen of death is a bsod
um no okay so it's like when your
computer crashes
your ram overloads or something and it
just restarts
right yeah so like that's that i'm
hearing that happen with you
so let's think a little bit about do you
have any idea about how to move forward
from here
um i feel like it's a lot to do with um
accepting myself but i'm not sure how to
do that
right so that's the problem because it's
like everyone's like
accept yourself nicholas for who you are
and then you will be free and then
you're like how the [ __ ] do i do that
yeah you know it makes no sense from
it's basically like telling depressed
people not to be depressed you know
like no it's actually the opposite
that's why that's why they have trouble
with it because it's not telling them to
not be depressed it's telling them to be
depressed
not quite sure what you mean so
accepting yourself
is not if so if there's someone who's
depressed and we tell them to accept
themselves
are we telling them to be depressed or
not be depressed
no that's not what i meant i mean like
when you tell depressed people not to be
depressed
oh right yeah yeah yeah okay it's like
you can tell them just
just don't be depressed it doesn't work
and i can tell you
just accept yourself and you're like i
have no [ __ ] idea how to do that
excellent yeah okay so let me tell you
what accepting yourself looks like
give me a second okay sure
okay so when you meet someone
you show them a mask right
why do you show them a mask um
to be liked by that person i would say
be accepted by the person
yeah so so see this is this is the
problem right so your solution is the
problem
to be liked by them to be accepted by
them and when they accept you
you [ __ ] yourself because they're not
actually accepting you
who are they accepting well yeah my
husk basically yep yeah and so all of
your interactions
reinforce the idea that the only thing
about me that is
that is worth loving is my mask
yeah and so like the more people that
accept your mask
what happens to your emotional
loneliness
well it would get worse absolutely the
solution
is the problem so now let me ask you a
question
nicholas sure how do we change that
cycle
well in that case um it would be
stopping
like stopping yourself from putting a
mask on which
would that's easier said than done but
absolutely
yeah but go ahead
oh i was i was going to say basically um
not to enable yourself going that way
and try to
you know be yourself around more people
yeah so but we've made so that's very
different right because telling the
depressed person to not
be depressed in that case the person
doesn't
know how to do it they literally don't
know how to do it
but now we've come to a different
problem you know how to do it
it's just really hard yeah does that
make sense
like there's apples and oranges yeah
yeah
definitely okay right so like like now i
know this is gonna sound weird but this
is how you accept yourself
when you show yourself to other people
you have to that's you have to accept
yourself in that process
does that make sense you can't show
yourself to someone without
accepting who you are yeah
i can see that right so like i know it
sounds weird but that's how you do it
so what what that means practically is i
i think that like
there are going to be times where you
interact with other people where there's
going to be a part of you that says
you're going to have a thought or you're
going to want to do something or say
something
and there's going to be a part of you
that says nicholas don't do that
because if you say that they'll run away
you know which part i'm talking about um
well that would be the suppressed part
of me or like my actual
but i encourage you to look at your yeah
go ahead
yeah no um i'm not sure how to phrase it
uh
it would be the part over the my expect
expectations of others inside of me or
sure
sure yeah my point is i'm not sure i was
afraid the
mask has a cognitive component right so
when we call a mask you're not actually
putting on a mask what the mask is
is it's a set of thoughts that dictate
your behaviors
sure does that make sense so the thing
that if you want to accept yourself
what you have to do is notice those
thoughts that are telling you to not say
something
and then choose the other thing and
they're gonna say like so you have a
girlfriend now it sounds like
no no no no no okay um so
so you know like are there certain
things that we've talked about today
which you thought would be relevant but
you haven't shared because you're afraid
of judgment
um hold on i'm trying to think about it
um only thing
no no not really okay
yeah no just going okay can i um you
gotta
let me know if this is going overboard
okay but i'm just gonna ask you a
question
can we talk about why you don't have a
girlfriend
sure okay now my hope in talking about
why you don't have a girlfriend is that
you're going to have certain thoughts
about yourself
that the mask is going to want to cover
or certain feelings about yourself
right do you think that that's the case
if we talk about why you don't have a
girlfriend
i think it could be the case but not to
the extent you might think
okay so then give me something else
um the thing about this is that i've had
it for a while
so i've kind of come to accept it as a
part of me if that makes sense
that i just do it you know yep i
understand so that's why i want
something that's like
you know so let me put it this way you
know you said earlier that there are
some things that you
don't want to share with people because
they're private
so like let's pick one of those topics
and talk about it
um well this was one of the topics it's
not that i'm
honestly it's not because i'm afraid to
talk about it i just don't do it um
for the fact that i don't want to bother
people with it okay so what's something
that you don't want to bother us with
yeah well yeah this was one of them the
second
would be um my insecurity in
myself sometimes in my like the way i
approach people
which i feel like is a huge factor as to
why i don't have a girlfriend as well
um also my um
well what was i going to say also the
fact that i get depressed not diagnosed
which is like a huge
huge difference but everyone gets
depressed every now and then
which happens quite a bit um and all of
that kind of contributes to me you know
feeling it down a lot and i isolate
myself
um and then you know i just end up
getting those overlaps that talk to you
about nicholas i want you to show us an
ugly part of you
i want to see another i'm not sure how
to show that though i'm not sure what
like
what's that when you say that um
i don't know it's hard for me to do like
uh
when you say it i don't know what to
show you know
nothing really comes up if that makes
sense okay
so that's kind of interesting right so
that that leads to one of two
when i ask you to i want to see the
ugliest thing you've got
and that if you can't come up with
something what are the reasons that you
may not be able to come up with it
um could be the mask as you talked about
uh but um the other thing i'm not sure
about honestly
okay so one is that you've gotten so
used to suppressing it
that you don't even know how to find it
anymore i have another
wild wild idea what if you have nothing
ugly within you
and all you really have much like the
paranoid person
is a feeling that you're ugly and that
despite you look first what's ugly
within you you can't find anything
maybe what you just have is the feeling
of ugliness
yeah i could agree to yeah i could agree
um again as i mentioned at the start
uh whenever i feel this loneliness i
don't know why um and i think that's
connected with this because i can't
figure out any proper reason for me to
not
be lonely but it happens in a way yep
you know so
so i have a crazy idea it's just a
feeling
right it's not a truth there's nothing
broken
you're not ugly because i'm i'm telling
you man if you are ugly like that's cool
show us so that we can either accept you
or reject you
right and and
so i think this is also where acceptance
comes in i think you have to give
people the if you want so
nicholas this all comes down to your
sense of value
somewhere along the way you started to
believe
that you weren't worth very much
that people treated you poorly because
you weren't worth treating well
and like that's why you put on the mask
because people can't see the ugliness on
the inside
so you have to put on a mask because
what's down there is fundamentally ugly
and then you you say this a lot so like
you don't deserve a lot of friends
i don't want to bother people if we
think about those two statements what
that mean is that like
you're inconvenient like you're not
worth it
like you're not worth inconveniencing
someone else's day
it all comes down to value yeah now
here's the really tricky thing
as long as you keep a mask on your sense
of value will never
increase because the more you wear the
mask the more what they judge is the
mask and they don't judge you
and then you end up emotionally lonely
because you never get to connect with
someone
because all they connect with is a false
face that you put
yeah so the way that you connect with
people is by showing people now that's
hard
because i don't know that it's a
particular thing and maybe we can find
it maybe we can
but even if we can't find it what i
think you need is courage
because you have to you have to let them
look underneath the mask
and take the risk
of being hurt again
yeah but the only the only way that
you're gonna start
to have faith in yourself and the only
way you're gonna realize that you're not
ugly on the inside
is when you take off the mask you go
outside and then like people treat you
normally
and then the day that you start doing
that your life is going to be entirely
different because it's like holy [ __ ]
i'm actually a pretty cool guy people
actually like me they see me they know
me
and like maybe the reason that those 14
year olds blocked me is because they're
[ __ ] 14 and it's meow chat and the
internet is a weird place
maybe there's nothing fundamentally
wrong with me but you can't know that
unless you give people a chance
to reject you
right now the problem is that you're
never you're never putting anything on
the table like you're never
you're not giving people a chance to
know you that's why you're lonely yeah
i think um the hard part of it is to
to locate when exactly you put on the
mask
and then you know uh rejecting it or
putting it off
sure i'm not quite sure because yeah
because right now i've not really
thought about
putting the mask on more than what i
explained to you earlier
that the fact that everyone puts masks
on depending on the situation right
but i've never thought about it the way
you just put it um
so i don't think i know how when it's
there okay if that makes sense sure so
nicholas let me ask you
do you have a mask on right now possibly
i'm not i'm not entirely aware of it but
i think i do
yeah okay so what does that tell me
um that's something i can't
quite locate okay um yeah how does it
feel
how does it feel when i ask you these
questions and you can't answer them
uncomfortable and confusing good
perfect we're getting underneath the
mask
what feels uncomfortable about it tell
me about that discomfort
um i think the discomfort comes from the
fact that i can't answer
good so when you can't answer a question
that dr k is asking you how does that
make you feel
well yeah uncomfortable okay honestly it
makes me uncomfortable yeah
okay so there's what's uncomfortable
about it
it's uncomfortable about it because i
don't know why like the
the thing that i like because i don't
know it makes me uncomfortable because i
thought that
i kind of more or less knew why i had it
but this makes me a little bit
uncomfortable because i can't figure out
now
so how does how does someone who can't
figure something out
when they're being asked feel
uh well unknowledgeable or
stupid sometimes there we go so when you
say uncomfortable
do you mean stupid
um not entirely when i mean
uncomfortable it's just when i think
back
to all the times i've interacted with
people when i i don't know when i've had
the mask on then
yeah but i'm talking about right now
okay so so
you don't know when you've had the mask
on so i'm guessing so generally speaking
when i ask people questions
and they're not able to answer them and
they use the word uncomfortable what i
imagine they mean is that they feel dumb
because they don't have the answers
no that's not quite where i feel what do
you feel it's just
uh i want to say i mean i guess you
could call it stupid but not quite
uh is i feel more um surprised
in like in a bad way kind of like when
you get a shock right
um for the fact that i haven't known
about this because i
i feel like i know myself quite well um
but apparently i don't it doesn't make
sense yeah so so
so you feel like you should have figured
this out
yeah yeah i guess you could say that
yeah so now that's interesting
so i think like that too comes from your
sense of value
right so instead of just feeling stupid
oh this is gonna be hard nicholas okay
but i i wanna i want you guys to really
like pay attention to this
instead of just feeling stupid he's
blaming himself for
not figuring it out already and
that comes from the idea that you're
fundamentally you're not
worth it right like oh god this is so
hard i hope you guys understand this
because i can't explain it better
like the person who doesn't value
themselves
blames themselves for not knowing
something
when they learn something new
do you guys get that like you guys see
how that's his just it's his
like instead of just feeling dumb like
anyone else
he feels worthless because he couldn't
figure it out
he should have figured it out long ago
look at how dumb i am like look at how
worthless i am
other people would have been able to
figure it out but i can't figure it out
you guys see that it's all it's all like
spiraling out of this sense of lack of
work does that make sense to you
nicholas
that makes sense you're like blaming
yourself for not having figured this out
is that fair yeah it's not no it's not
fair it's not fair yeah but
yeah is it accurate i wouldn't say it's
fair it's accurate yeah yeah
right so but do you see how like i'm
just asking you a question and then what
your mind is doing is you're saying
oh i can't believe that i didn't notice
this before
like how dumb am i that that that is the
um feeling of australia
yeah right so like that too is a feeling
of value it's about a feeling of your
identity as a person it's not like i'm
dumb because i have low iq it's like i
should have figured this out like you're
beating yourself
up right so now i'm going to ask you a
different question nicholas here you are
being an idiot in front of us and
revealing
all of the things that you should have
figured out on your own
and how do you feel
um i feel nervous honestly and
i feel um
i feel like i should have done this a
long time ago with friends honestly
that's that's the two main feelings okay
so
so let's there it is again okay so now
i'm gonna ask you i should have done
this a long time ago with friends
tell me about that um
if i if i feel like if i've done it with
friends before
maybe the problem wouldn't have been as
profound as
as it is and so who's whose fault is it
that the problem is this bad
in that sense i would say it would have
been my own fault there you go you see
how your mind does that
your mind jumps to blame you
no matter like however i twist and turn
oh it's like oh
i should like you see do you really get
what i'm saying here
yeah i can see now what you mean i think
i do that quite a lot
yeah your mind jumps to this idea that
it's your fault
and why is it your fault because your
sense of value for yourself is low
it can't be someone else's fault
nicholas
when they stopped when they blocked you
whose fault wasn't nick
my fault there it is yeah yeah i see
i see
what do you see tell me
i see why um you know these feelings
kind of come up now
if i'm constantly putting myself under
the bus basically
exactly yeah you know that makes sense
right makes a lot of sense yeah it's
weird man but so here's the thing
i hope that you have some some kind of
hope at this point
because i certainly have hope for you
sure
yeah i mean i don't feel so here's the
thing i don't feel hopeless
um yeah because i felt progress and then
i've you know kind of like taken two
steps forward and then one back kind of
back and forth um what really gets me is
when i have
you know um those episodes of overload
because that then it kind of affects me
for like days at a time
but i feel like yeah so like
um let's say i get it and then i'm
feeling
lonely and anxious for like three hours
maybe
um and then i then i will feel numb for
like two days three days
okay and that's that's what really like
makes me feel lonely after that point
now what i'm not like everything else
you say still counts but this is what
like really hits me that's what i was
hoping to
kind of talk about yeah so i i know this
is going to sound maybe a little bit
disappointing nicholas but
i don't think you can do so much about
those overload states
right now sure i think the overload
states will get better
over time the more that you notice
and accept that there is a part of you
that is going to twist and turn and
blame yourself
and my guess is that if you tunnel into
those overloaded states or
right right before you get overloaded if
you tunnel down into what you're
thinking
somehow it's a thought that stems from
your sense that like you messed up in
some way
or that you're not a good person
i could agree it's like a frenzy of like
thoughts about oh i messed this up or i
should have done this or like
you know this person like i could have
done this better and and
like it's something about you not and in
all of those
shoulds that you tell yourself those are
not acceptance
because like even then like if you say
oh i should have done this with friends
like you can't accept that like
it's okay to not have done it with
friends like you're doing it now
like it like do you see how should and
acceptance or opposite
ends of the spectrum like this pen is
black
it should be blue like that's not
accepting that the pen is black
it's just two opposite ends and
and so the cool thing is that i think
that you you will get better but
the the solution to the overload
episodes
is not to fix the episode it's to slowly
chip away at the fuel for the episode
right right so and and the more that you
look at like how your mind makes it your
fault
is your mind making it your fault here
when you're listening to me is it doing
something
no i'm just i'm just listening okay i'm
thinking about when i have the episodes
that um usually something triggers it
right so
i've done something but it's just that
way i feel like i was in the wrong yep
there it is okay
yeah right you could tell me more but do
you see you see how like what triggers
the episode is the idea that you've done
something wrong and what's [ __ ] up is
you probably didn't even do anything
wrong
and so what i'm saying is if you want to
conquer the episode so i want everyone
to understand this
people come to me and they say how do i
put out the fire my house is burning
down every week it burns down
and what i say is don't try to put out
the fire put out the match
put out the match that gets you started
and like because people look at this and
it's kind of bizarre but like
it's way easier to put out a match than
it is to put out the fire once it
started
and so once you get into that overload
mode it's going to take a lot of effort
a lot of work to kind of wrap that in
but what i'm telling you and this is
when when i think about
you know when i've helped people who
have like panic attacks and stuff to the
point where they're like off of
medication
they're basically i mean they're not
really cured but in psychiatry we don't
cure anyone
we have something called sustained
remission which means that
they don't have any symptoms for a long
period of time but we don't cure anyone
because we don't we can't do that fine
so when i see
patients with sustained remission the
way that i get there is i
i get them to put out the match you go
to the root of it
and you pull out the root and all of the
subsequent behaviors
will come crumbling down
so would you say um would you say the
way to find the match would just to be
recognized in it
when it happens absolutely because you
said
it gets triggered by what nicholas
um by me blaming myself basically there
it is
yeah so the
the hard part at that point i would say
is just to
to stop the thoughts from rolling in
nope you can't stop them nope
that's not acceptance right see that's
what you try to do
i would bet money i would bet money that
you fight against them
you fight against them with every fiber
of your being
and the more you fight them the more
they grow
that's right right so i want you to
imagine this
i want you guys to think about your
thoughts like water
and the harder you hit it like if i if i
jump off of a hundred foot diving
board and i make myself flat and i smack
into water it's hard like concrete
the harder i push against it the harder
it pushes back
if i'm in a bathtub or if i'm in the
let's say a bathtub
if i'm in the bathtub and there are too
many waves in the bathtub
and i push against the waves what
happens
when they push back absolutely and so
that's what you do
when those thoughts come what do you do
nicholas
i push back and then what they what do
they do
well they push back harder then what do
you do yeah
push back yeah back and forth you know
and then you hit
overload right you see that it's an
escalating cycle until you're like
you're tired of pushing back
you're physically exhausted you just lay
back they hammer you for a while and
then they stop
and then you crawl out of the tub and
you're numb for two or three days
because you're exhausted from all this
cognitive activity
so acceptance is laying back at the very
beginning
okay stopping the cycle so when they
hammer you
you just notice it and say oh here it is
again
here's my old friend here's 14 year old
nicholas
who's paranoid that the world doesn't
like him
because that nicholas is still 14 it's
not the person that you are today
with your cool hair and your beard
yeah right there's four there's 14 year
old nicholas who's not confident
who's insecure
and sometimes he's afraid and he comes
and he says
nick i'm i'm afraid that people aren't
gonna like me and then you're like [ __ ]
you
everyone likes you you piece of [ __ ] why
are you complaining
and then he grows he gets stronger every
time you push him away
he gets stronger
so when those spirals start see that
within yourself see that there's like
this part of you that's like oh my god
these people don't like me
i screwed something up and instead of
saying no no no you didn't screw
anything up you're great bro
you're awesome because that's actually
what the abuse of 14 year old nicholas
looks like
that's the positive [ __ ] mental
attitude that your therapist taught
right it's telling you like no man like
you're awesome like everyone likes you
you have no reason to feel that way
i know it sounds bizarre but that
positivity is abusive
it's the weirdest thing in the world
so you would say it's basically enabling
yourself absolutely
and that's what we hear from you right
we hear that everything you do makes it
worse
let's just stop doing this that's
definitely true right yeah
and it started with this positive mental
attitude stuff because the positive
mental attitude was useful for a time it
worked for a time
right it helped you make friends and
stuff but now you're finding like okay i
can't make authentic friends
definitely and so i i think that there
are times where you interact with other
people where
you want to say something that's
authentic and then your mind tells you
you're going to screw it up if you tell
them
yeah and then you don't speak
and instead what you need to do is speak
and here's the wild thing
i'm not going to tell you you won't
screw it up
the way to overcome this is by screwing
it up
over and over and over again because
you're not going to screw it up all the
time
you're going to screw it up sometimes
and you're not going to screw it up
other times
and that's when you're going to find
like the middle road of like who you are
that you're not perfect because that's
what you try to be by the way i don't
know if you noticed
sure like the more you try to be perfect
the more that comes from the idea that
you don't have inherent value
like the less and the more insecure you
are in yourself as a person the harder
you try to be perfect and instead what
you need to be is just be who you are
which is like a 20 year old guy who's
like got some problems with
self-confidence but it's also like kind
of friendly and charismatic and knows
how to talk to people
sure be that yeah
be the guy who like pisses some people
off and
befriends others
yeah yeah i can agree the thing
it's hard though right it's absolutely
hard to not push back
yeah that's the that's the main thing
yep um
so now nicholas we're gonna test you you
ready for a test
sure okay if i tell you to push back
and you can't push back
how do you think about yourself
uh wait um can you rephrase that yeah so
you say it's hard
so let's say you try and you fail
how do you think about yourself after
you fail
i would feel disappointed normally
yep right and then you would say to
yourself i should be able to do it
yep correct and there it is again
do you see it same thing yeah
yeah yeah yeah i see what you mean right
yeah so so the next time yep
so the next time you try and it's hard
and you fail what are you gonna tell
yourself instead
that's okay absolutely yeah
and what is it okay it's okay to fail
yes yeah definitely okay it's okay to
not be perfect
yep and and what do we call that by the
way
acceptance there you go yeah
that's how you accept yourself you see
you figured it out
yeah now i just have to put it into
practice
you know what and and what happens when
you try and you fail
then i should be okay with it and accept
it
yeah right because even then when you
say now i need to put it into practice
what you're doing
is your your d devaluing the success
of understanding you just had
okay that's interesting
because i didn't notice that yep because
you don't because it's there man it's
there in your programming right because
when you say now i need to put it into
practice what that says is nicolas isn't
good enough
okay that's interesting
yeah that's interesting because i i
would say i saw it differently but
yeah when i said it firstly it was more
like a hopeful statement
sure but i can see what you mean by it
yeah yeah yep
and i'm not i'm not disputing so i think
the other tricky thing is that i think
hope can be within this thing
right i i think you can because if
you're different you can hope
right it's it's subtle but you're like
if i was a different person if i behaved
like i should
i'm hopeful for the future
okay if i dot dot dot then i can hope
but the still subtle thing there is that
nicholas you don't need to do anything
man you're perfect just the way that you
are
yeah perfection and imperfection is what
you mean like yep
there you go yeah yeah okay gotcha
gotcha yeah
there you go yeah yeah
yeah that's how it meant
yes that's good that's progress
because let me explain something to you
when you say that's hard man
there's no should there there's no hope
that is a statement of acceptance okay
right that is a statement that says i
don't know if i can do it
it's not beating yourself for up for not
being able to do it it's not saying that
you should be able to do it
it's saying you know what man that's
hard
that's acceptance yeah
yeah i can see i see yeah that's true
i'm trying to wrap my uh mind around
yeah sorry it's it's kind of
it's getting abstract but nicholas
really i
i think it's like there are a couple of
core things where i really think if you
can kind of
really get a handle on them and learn
how to see them
and learn how to say that's hard
right like so like there's 14 year old
nicholas and there's 20 year old
nicholas and when 14 year old nicholas
comes to 20 year old nicholas and he
says
hey my friends bro blocked me on meow
chat
and then when nicholas says hey man
that's rough that's hard
that's got to be tough that's acceptance
right
it's not telling him hey you're a piece
of [ __ ] it's also not telling him that
you're a wonderful person you didn't do
anything wrong maybe you did
either way you can accept that it's hard
that it's tough
and it doesn't have to mean anything
more beyond that
okay questions yeah
i'm trying to think of some
right so what would you do um
i guess i guess this kind of answer i'm
trying to unfold it a bit more
sure so what we do when some someone um
does something about the mean
but you can't figure out the reasoning
point
in this case being uh so i used to live
in spain
um in spain what happened i went to a
party
and at the party someone um literally
punished me like without any reason
i figured out the reason they say being
that she was trying to get some money
off of someone
um you know by doing some
work she would say i don't know if i can
stay on stream
i don't know if you can't either i mean
there's against tournaments
yeah um it was you know some illegal
kind of what she's trying to do with
someone
okay um and she felt like kind of
blocked that off so she punched me
um but i i didn't know that until later
so i beat myself up for that because i
couldn't figure out
why i was punched right um
so in that sense why would you what
would you do like because
i'm not sure how you would accept that
thing
as except for just that that you know
except that someone punched you without
reasoning
how would you not overthink it is what
i'm trying to say because i
instantly you know tried to as we've
you know talked about tried to find a
reason for it yep
so i think because that's a great
example man because that example shows
and i say this with love how [ __ ] up
your reasoning is
because when you're at a party and you
get randomly punched by someone
if your mind somehow does some
gymnastics to make it your fault
when you don't even know who this person
is and she just walks up to you and
punches you
like do you see how that's just
absolutely ridiculous like the reason
she punched you is because she's an
[ __ ]
that's the reason right has nothing to
do with you
definitely but i'm trying to figure out
like how would you
because i feel like most people would
think about that it's an extreme right
absolutely such a random thing that
would
occur so how would you stop yourself and
well not stop yourself but how would you
not beat yourself up from it is what i'm
trying to ask
okay so i mean i think oddly enough
i know this sounds bizarre nicholas i
don't think most people would beat
themselves up after getting punched
punched randomly in the face sure enough
okay sure
okay but i i think but that doesn't help
you because you beat yourself up
and that should just give us an idea for
how strong that complex is in your mind
so here's a here's an answer for you so
i want you and this is going to sound
kind of weird but maybe it'll help
because it's sort of a long shot
so i want you to think about karma karma
what's your understanding of karma
um i have the understanding that karma
is necessarily good or bad but it's a
bunch of
energy that kind of determines where you
go in the next life
okay if i'm just correct yep so i'm
going to tell you a story
so you've heard of this guy buddha
buddha yeah siddharth okay
so buddha gets enlight okay and then he
like he's like teaching people
and so he's got a bunch of disciples and
he's like sort of famous at this point
and one day someone comes up to him so
he's like teaching and now he like gives
a lecture and after the lecture
you know he's got his disciples that are
there and then someone comes up and
sometimes people will come up and ask
him questions
and so someone comes up to him and and
he says hey do you remember me and
buddha says
no i don't he says well you tried to
teach me how to meditate 15 years ago
and it didn't work
and then the dude spits and put this
face
he's like [ __ ] you and then his
disciples get pissed they're like this
guy's like he's disrespecting the master
like
let's beat his ass and then brother's
like no no calm down chill
and he's like just let him go so the
dude like spits in his face and he like
walks away
he's like expecting something to happen
maybe walks away and they're like how
can you let this guy disrespect you like
that and with this like that's just a
karma that he has to wipe away
so he has like some amount of resentment
i may have wronged him
he's fit in my face and now we're done
he's gone he's gonna go live his life
i'm gonna go live mine
it's just sort of like it just gets
wiped away
just because i'm enlightened doesn't
mean that i've become free of all of my
past karmas
it's just a debt that i had to pay okay
so i don't know if this is going to help
you or not
but i would say that you know if you're
trying to think about
why bad things happen to you and you're
looking for an
alternate solution besides
i'm an idiot and it's my fault and i
lack value
i would toss out garma for you to think
about
now you have to decide for yourself
whether like after studying it and
thinking about it it's a good alternate
solution
but in my mind you know all causes have
effects
and all effects have causes
so one way to think about it is like
you're looking for you know the cause to
the effect of her punching you whereas
like that cause may not
come from you and in fact her punching
you may not be in effect it could be a
cause
she could be opening up a new karma
where like you had the opportunity to
punch her back
right anyway it gets complicated but i i
mean the simplest answer i can give you
is like just understand that
some of the [ __ ] that happens to you in
life is like you could say
you don't want to think about karma you
could just say hey man [ __ ] happens
some people say that right some people
say that the world is a random place and
sometimes just random bad things happen
to good people like which is a
completely reasonable
hypothesis on the other hand some people
say that everything is determined and
orderly and like it's because god wants
it to happen and stuff like that
i think that's completely fine
hypothesis too in the middle i think
there's just the simple principle of
cause and effect which is karma which is
that like
things happen like all things have
causes and all causes have offense
and that doesn't mean that you're the
creator of the universe and sometimes
people are going to be [ __ ] to you
because that's just
you know why is one person born in the
united states whereas another person is
born in zimbabwe whereas another person
is born
in australia you can say it's randomness
you can say it's karma
but in your case i'd say just think
about like you know are you the center
of all things that happened to you
um in my world technically yes you know
because you
yeah you perceive everything right so
that's something that i would encourage
you to think about right so i don't
doubt that you perceive it
and you may even arrive at a logical
truth that you are the center of all
things that happened to you but i'd
encourage you to think about it
and be like is it my fault if i'm
walking down the street and someone
you know spills their drink on me
did i do something wrong and i'm not
sure
i need you i think you need to give your
life
actors besides yourself
yeah i could agree yeah right because
sometimes when people block you it's
because
they're envious not because you did
something wrong
but because they're envious all kinds of
reasons people block other people
sure yeah i mean it's not the fact that
that they blocked me it's more like the
way that
they just you know cut off the
relationship sure
you know is it yeah because people get
locked all the time
but it's more like there yeah yeah and
so once again there are lots of reasons
that could happen i think the problem is
that your mind
jumps to one and the more that you
notice
okay here my mind is blaming me again
and even in that scenario if you notice
that your mind is blaming you for being
punched by a random person at a party
then just be like whoa that's kind of
weird like there it is again
blaming me for being punched by a random
person
sure yeah and i know that's something
not going i was gonna say like i i don't
even think you need to do much more than
that
if you can just notice that that's the
part of the mind i i kid you not
it it starts to get better i know it's
bizarre
well yeah it's definitely worth a try
something you know
yeah 100 yeah that's a wild man
that she just punched what do you mean
yeah no i was there
so we were sitting um like in a circle
and i was talking to my friend he was
sitting across me and she was sitting in
the middle
and then um to put a friend she thought
that was blocking her because she was
trying to
charge him for it and then she punched
me um
and then we left but i i didn't find
that out on so like a few days later
so sounds like you helped your friend
out
yeah i mean he also just found it out
later
so you know but it it is what it is
um yeah that's
wild story man yeah i mean that's um one
of the good things to do when you travel
around right
you get to experience them i said that's
one of the good things about traveling
is that yes experience wild stories yeah
yeah
other questions um no i don't think so
okay so we've got a choice then nicholas
i feel like we've covered uh
like you know we've kind of gotten to
like an important conclusion
if you want to open up something else we
can or we can kind of switch to
meditation what do you think
uh i don't really have anything to open
okay
yeah um the one thought that you'd made
one statement which i don't think we had
really addressed one was that
independence leads to like a lack of
disclosing or sharing with other people
like you said something about
being independent and that's why you
don't want to share
yeah i have this feeling um of
self-reliance right so i want to be
very independent in pretty much
everything i do
which is also you know with contracting
with my own feelings and stuff like that
so i usually don't
tend to to reach out to people on this i
know
for sure i can't do it myself um
which is kind of contradicting with you
know this whole thing because you know
but that's how it is practically not
necessarily
i i don't i don't think it's
contradictory at all i think that
if you if you have low value in yourself
you can strive for independence because
if you can do it all by yourself
then you don't have to worry about it
sort of negates the low value
it negates being you know relying on
other people i think it makes a lot of
sense but i
okay um so let's talk about meditation
sure have you had experience with
meditation
uh a little bit because um i used to
meditate
like before going to bed just like
sitting down and relaxing
for a bit but not like too much
okay so i just
i did like five minutes just sitting
closing my eyes and listening
that's it like some minutes
okay let me think about what to do
sure i have a meditation technique for
you but it's a little bit
advanced so it could be hard
um but i i wanted to do something a
little bit different
okay let me just think about how to
explain it okay
okay so i want to teach you something
nicholas that
involves understanding
your relationship to the outside world
okay okay so if we think about like this
punching example
something in the outside world happens
and you
somehow think it has something to do
with you
does that make sense like i know it
sounds really bizarre
but like as human beings we assume that
we
interact with the world in a particular
way that we're responsible for some
things
right so in a weird way it's almost like
we believe subconsciously that we
control
the world i know it sounds weird but
like let me give you an example let's
say that i apply for a job
or i ask a girl out and i get rejected
i blame myself it's my fault that i
didn't get the job
i should have studied harder i should
have done a better internship i should
have wrote a bigger personal statement
whatever
and we don't really acknowledge that the
outside world has all kinds of reasons
for treating us the way that it does
which have nothing to do with us
like maybe the reason that i didn't get
the job is because
you know it was a job maybe the company
is actually going out of business
and then they interviewed people and
then like never hired it
right but that's not the way that we
think about it we always assume that we
are responsible for the things that
happen to us
does that make sense yeah so
i know it sounds weird but i want to
teach you a way where you can start
discovering what the actual relationship
between you and the outside world is
where does nicholas end in the outside
world begin
okay okay i know it sounds weird yeah so
let's give it a try um the the practice
is actually quite simple
but it's hard okay so what i i have to
figure out how am i
i need music
okay so um what i want you to do
is tune into the stream
okay so you can hear the background
music
can you hear the music yeah i hear the
okay so this is what i want you to do so
i want all you guys to close your eyes
and listen to the music so hear the
notes
in the music
[Music]
can you hear the music nicholas yeah i
hear you
okay so when you listen to my words
or the music
i don't know how to put this but your
attention is
focused on my words right it's focused
on something outside
does that make sense yeah so you're
listening to the notes of the music
sure okay so now what i want you to do
is put your attention on your ears
and put your attention not physically on
your ears but
on the sense of hearing okay
so don't listen to the notes pay
attention to
you hearing them so it used to be that
your attention was on the notes
now your attention is on you hearing the
notes
can you do that i
think so yeah try
[Music]
um
[Applause]
now you may find that your attention
goes back
to the notes after a few moments
[Applause]
does that happen a little bit
okay and then when it moves back to the
notes shift it back
to the hearing of the notes so put all
your attention
on your hearing as opposed to the music
[Music]
okay
how long can you hold on to the hearing
instead of the notes
i think maybe um half a minute to 45
seconds at a time
okay before going back
[Music]
okay so just we're gonna practice for
about another minute okay
okay
[Music]
me
once again your attention may go to the
sound of my voice or the notes
hear me speaking and then move back
to the hearing
so as i continue to talk do your best
not to pay attention to my words but
listen or pay attention to your
hearing of the words without paying
attention to the words
[Music]
it can be difficult
now go ahead and come back okay
[Music]
can you go back to camera sure
okay okay
so now what i'm going to ask you to do
is look at me sure
so see my face so we're going to do it
same thing but this time we're going to
use our eyes
okay so look at my face
and so see it right you can look at the
background
you can put your attention on anything
on your screen
or actually yeah or you can look at
something in your room it doesn't really
matter
okay then what i want you to do is put
your attention to the looking
instead of looking at something having
your attention
on the objects that your eyes see have
your attention be
on the looking itself
so it'll almost feel it feels to me like
zooming out
and then like a blurry version kind of
yeah it's not quite blurry vision but
then you're doing it right right so just
pay attention to the seeing itself as
opposed to the object of seeing
and you can look at something like an
object in your room
or the screen
and then focus on the object like let
your eyes look at the object and really
see the object and then
let your attention pull back and see the
seeing itself
we'll go for about a minute
okay
thoughts questions do you want to share
what that was like for you
i felt um i felt like sort of calmness
because i
i didn't feel like i was thinking about
stuff you know yeah so
i just felt uh observing
i guess you could call it just like
seeing
yeah did that make sense where you're
seeing the seeing itself
as opposed to seeing an object yeah
definitely okay i i feel like that's
doable
okay so so i i don't know how else to
put this but
so here's the cool thing about this
practice okay
when we see an object it is outside of
us right like so let's say here's me
here's the object if i'm looking at it
then the object is out here and
therefore me and the object are separate
does that make sense yeah
so like i'm over here seeing is over
here
the object is over here
when you look at the seeing what happens
is the seeing
moves from you to the outside
yeah and then you're looking at the
seeing itself
so there's almost a piece of you
there's a piece of who you think you are
that you shift outside of yourself by
looking at the scene
because then the seeing is out there and
you're looking at it and then you're
over here
does that make sense yeah yeah yeah as
you said
it kind of feels like um zooming out for
me it's more like
a bit of a blurriness i guess you could
say um
but it definitely feels like you're not
like focusing on one thing
yeah except for like you know so so
so this is tricky right so after the
zooming out
there is actually the focusing on the
thing that is doing the zooming out
right right it's noticing
the seeing itself which has the effect
on the object side of zooming out
but what i really want you to focus on
is the act of seeing
yeah i got you yeah okay that that is
um no yeah go on no go go for it
i was just gonna say that is i mean it's
doable but i don't
i can't do it for like long periods good
yeah it's very hard
so here's the crate i know this is gonna
sound wild
but your problem nicholas is that you
confuse
what's in here with what's in the
outside world
this person ghosted me that's not on the
outside
that's on the inside this woman punched
me
that's not on the outside that's on the
inside and that's the [ __ ] up thing
that we've showed you today
and so literally if you do this practice
you will learn
how to like like get control over what
is on the inside and what is on the
outside
instead of misattributing everything you
will begin to see
on a very fundamental level what you
are and what the outside list and what
you control
and what you can't control this all
comes down to
earlier you toss out this tiny tiny quip
where i don't know what to show people
because i don't know who i am
don't you yeah and this will be a
practice where you can learn
are you seeing are you the object that
you see
are you the seeing itself or are you
something else
and if you continue to do this i really
think it'll help you along with the
noticing and acceptance and all that
other craft we talked about
it's like literally a cognitive training
skill to like
do something different with your mind
you can practice it
and then when it comes to dealing with
your your view of like your
confidence in yourself or your value as
a person you'll have done a bunch of
push-ups so when it comes time
to actually use your mind it'll like
work way better it'll make everything
way easier for you
does that make sense well yeah yeah that
makes sense
okay cool man any last thoughts or
questions
no um i think we're good to go okay
listen uh nick it's been awesome having
you man i really really
um appreciated what you shared with us
i think it's very very important like
there are a couple of key principles
here that i think are really really
important
so thank you so much for um you know
coming on
i'm going to take a moment to collect my
thoughts and then i'll try to recap
for other people you're welcome to watch
the stream sure is that okay of course
yeah i'm sure well thank you for having
me thank you for coming man it's been
awesome take care no worries
you too man bye now bye
you